As the world’s attention is set on the Israel-Hamas
war in Gaza, violence has been escalating
in the occupied West Bank, with Israeli forces
carrying out raids – and a spike in settler
attacks against Palestinians.
Even before the October 7 terror attacks by
Hamas militants, existing tensions meant 2023
was already set to be the deadliest year on
record for Palestinians in the West Bank.
Since the attack, things have escalated sharply.
Israeli forces have been conducting a widespread
security crackdown…
Bolstering forces in the area and carrying
out raids and operations across the West Bank.
So far, they say they’ve arrested at least
800 people - 500 of whom, they say, are affiliated
with Hamas.
They’ve also carried out two airstrikes
in the last week, on what they say were Hamas
and other militant group targets.
Israeli settler violence is on the rise too.
That means Israelis who live in settlements
inside the occupied territory - considered
illegal under international law – are carrying
out attacks on the Palestinians there – entering
villages and expelling, and even killing,
Palestinian civilians.
According to UN figures, attacks have more
than doubled since the Hamas terror attacks
– with settlers vowing revenge.
Eyewitnesses say in some of the cases the
settlers have been wearing military style
uniforms or that the military were even present
during the attacks.
So far, the UN says more than 90 Palestinians
have been killed in the West Bank since October
7.
Many Palestinians I have spoken to say they’re
too scared to move around, for fear of being
targeted.
The political situation is increasingly fragile
too.
Protests have been erupting all over the West
Bank – and not just in solidarity with Gazans.
People here are also angry at their leaders.
Hamas doesn’t control the West Bank, the
Palestinian Authority does.
Many protesters have been openly calling its
leader President Mahmoud Abbas to step down.
And support for Hamas appears to be growing.
One protest I went to in Ramallah – the
West Bank’s biggest city and a stronghold
of support for the Palestinian Authority – people
flew Hamas flags and openly chanted support
for its wing commander Mohammed Deif, a man
at the top of Israel’s hit list.
Hamas has called on its supporters in the
West Bank to get involved in fighting Israel.
So far we have not seen that happening.
One of the many questions being asked here
is not JUST what Gaza will look like after
all of this,